---
title: 'Things I've been reading - week of 08/09'
date: 2025-08-09
permalink: /posts/2025/08/reads08092025/
tags:
  - reads
  - CAD
  - Polygenic Scores
  - Alzheimers
  - LLMs
---

Here are some things I read/enjoyed this week - please reach out to me if you have thoughts on any of these or have answers to my questions:

**Papers**

[Importance of Clinical, Laboratory, and Genetic Risk Factors for Incident Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) ](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/40605734/)

I've been going down a polygenics rabbit hole lately (see last week's reads for more details) and came across this paper recently. My interpretation (not a cardiologist) is that polygenic risk scores for CAD and other similar novel cardiovascular risk factors (CRFs) perform approximately as well as the traditional ones (hypertension, diabetes, etc). This is pretty impressive - and there's a pretty straightforward clinical application - which is always exciting for medical research, especially something based on math/modeling.

However, I have one polygenics question that I have yet to find a satisfactory answer for: Is there a meaningful way to quantify the impact of not being White? Like many people worldwide, I suffer from this affliction, and it seems silly to think that these findings have _zero_ value for someone like me (in fact, it's well-known that South Asians have a higher prevalence of Lp(a), one of the CRFs this paper studies). At the same time, all the polygenic scoring methods I've seen have used data that is almost entirely from white subjects, and thus their full predictive power does not hold across racial boundaries. I'm wondering what %age efficacy I can expect if I went in to get my genes analyzed, whether for something like this or the embryo discussion from last week.

[Lithium deficiency and the onset of Alzheimer’s disease](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-025-09335-x)

Once in a while, I read a paper that makes me just a tiny bit jealous that I didn't come up with the idea myself. This is one of those - I think it's brilliant (caveat: not a neurologist, either)!  Researchers analyzed a bunch of metal concentrations in the brain, and noticed that Lithium was the only one that was significantly reduced in the brain in patients with Alzheimers/Mild Cognitive Imoairment (MCI). The solution they came up with was to provide a different form of Li (Lithium orotate) that is particularly bad at amyloid binding, which is so clever! Reminds me of the mosquito eradication efforts in which they dump a ton of sterile mosquitos into an area, crowding out the 'real' ones -- or the way that CO binds with hemoglobin in place of oxygen - they are able to leverage this to slow (and possibly reverse?) amyloid plaque buildup!


**Substacks/Blogs**

[Bag of words, have mercy on us by Adam Mastroianni](https://www.experimental-history.com/p/bag-of-words-have-mercy-on-us)
This has instantly become one of my favorite metaphors for LLMs, and I've sent it to many a friend that keeps asking me to explain, one last time, how ChatGPT works. Is it a perfect analogy? No, but this feels pretty close without diving into Borges map territory. Easy to grasp, even with no technical background, exceptionally witty, and confirms my pre-existing notions about the limitations of LLMs? Perfect combo. I'm pretty skeptical about LLM progress to begin with, and even I was vastly underwhelmed by the performance of GPT-5. Makes reads like these all the more important, in order to temper people's expectations. 