---
title: "Things I've been reading - week of 08/30"
date: 2025-08-30
permalink: /posts/2025/08/reads08302025/
tags:
  - LLMs
  - Alignment
  - Electricity
  - Environment
  - Markets
  - Taylor Swift
  - Embryo Selection
---

Here are some things I read/enjoyed this week - please reach out to me if you have thoughts on any of these or have answers to my questions:

**Papers**

[https://transformer-circuits.pub/2025/attribution-graphs/biology.html](https://transformer-circuits.pub/2025/attribution-graphs/biology.html)

I stumbled upon this article after coming up with a rough "alignment" idea recently. My idea can be described as follows:

Somewhere in the internal workings of the LLM, we can see the weights that the model is using at any given time -- if we are able to understand which region of the vector space maps to concepts like "deception", "lying", etc (or malicious/dangerous more broadly), would it be possible to actually monitor the LLM and flag responses that might have gone through this subspace?
One way to figure out this mapping is to explicitly tell the model to do deception or evil things, and monitor the weights as it does so.
Is this feasible? I'm not an expert on the inner workings of LLMs, but it seems reasonable to me that people can monitor semantic spaces to see what "thoughts" an LLM is having - and it seems like there wouldn't be a great way for an LLM to get around it (even if it figures out some different language or encoding, we could just repeat the process)

An extension: Applying a neuroscience analogy, I wonder if it would be possible to clamp down on (prevent) the model from accessing this region of semantic space. In the same way that we are able to use a barbiturate (for the Wada test) or TMS to temporarily restrict regions of the brain, can we prevent the LLM (after it has been fully trained) from passing foward weights in the "evil" region?

Back to the reading: This paper is one of the best attempts I've seen to actually understand the internal workings of an LLM. It looks at a variety of scenarios, including jailbreaks and modifications to the weights - and the results are fascinating! I still think my idea has some possibilities, and it's refreshing to know that I'm not completely crazy, but this article makes it clear that it's not as simple as I would have hoped. 





**Substacks/Blogs/Articles**

[Construction Physics: I Was Wrong About Data Center Water Consumption](https://www.construction-physics.com/p/i-was-wrong-about-data-center-water)

This is a correction to an earlier piece by Construction Physics that looked into US water usage and the impact of data centers. This has been a hot topic lately, in both my tech and environmental circles, and I think it's important to carefully examine the data and make informed conclusions. This piece (a correction) illustrates that perfectly, and that automatically makes it worth reading.  

[Not Boring: The Electric Slide](https://www.notboring.co/p/the-electric-slide)
Detailed overview of the history of the Electric Stack and the ways in which electricity-centered technology has evolved over the past few decades and has enabled massive space for innovation. Examines things like batteries, renewables, and more - and looks at the future of the space. I've learned a lot about novel battery technologies, electricity distribution methods, and more over the past few months, and it feels like this post is quite a comprehensive overview. 

[Imperfect Information: Celebrity Unions and Price Volatility](https://rajivsethi.substack.com/p/celebrity-unions-and-price-volatility)

The big news of the week: ~~Taylor Swift and Travis Kelce got engaged~~There was insider trading on the engagement? As someone who is interested in the underlying movements behind markets (and the second-order consequences of market responses), I thought this was a really neat perspective. The difference between a "descriptive" and "prescriptive" market is usually hard to see, but prediction markets make it much more obvious (the lower trade volume and clear outcomes really help). I wonder what strategies hedge funds and other algorithmic traders (who actually have the liquidity to move markets) have to use to limit the risks of impacting prices in this way.

[Monomythical: What embryo selection can't do (yet)](https://nayafia.substack.com/p/what-embryo-selection-cant-do-yet)

Even more embryo selection content - will this ever get boring to me? 

A detailed examination of the practical limitations of embryo screening technology and how it can actually be applied. Whenever I bring this topic up with friends, the instinct is to jump to a _Gattaca_ universe and absurd hypotheticals start flying around the table -- but this article provides a sane, level-headed analysis of the current state of the technology and what it actually can and can't do. Part of my curiosity with this subject has to do with the ethical implications, and part is due to the technological advancements that have made this level of observation? control? possible - but there is a small part that is motivated by my desire to understand the scene as I plan to eventually embark on a parenting journey of my own. This piece is a good reminder that while firms and providers promote this technology as a panacea, there are a number of non-trivial hurdles to deal with first. 

