---
title: 'Things I've been reading - week of 08/16'
date: 2025-08-16
permalink: /posts/2025/08/reads08162025/
tags:
  - reads
  - neurostimulation
  - LLMs
  - AI Safety
  - FDA
  - Cardiology
---

Here are some things I read/enjoyed this week - please reach out to me if you have thoughts on any of these or have answers to my questions:

**Papers**

[Non-invasive vagus nerve stimulation and exercise capacity in healthy volunteers: a randomized trial](https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/46/17/1634/8023896?login=false)

Not AI-related, but still pretty neat - non-invasive nerve stimulation can improve exercise capacity in healthy humans. Pretty straightforward, but has some serious implications. Making exercise more tolerable can go a long way towards improving people's health. The more fun scenario, though - this, but for athletes. Tennis headbands? Earbuds for runners? Football helmets? As a sports fan, I say squeeze this in wherever you can. 

Anyone who tackles a neuro-stimmed Derrick Henry should win a Nobel for their bravery.



**Substacks/Blogs/Articles**

[Meta Flirty Chatbot Incident: Reuters](https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/meta-ai-chatbot-death/)

This horrifying incident made the rounds last weekend, and spawned a massive reaction. Reuters also published an [internal Meta document detailing policies for chatbot behavior](https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/meta-ai-chatbot-guidelines/) at the same time, and this seems to have broken into the greater consciousness. Took them long enough! It's hard to emphasize just how nauseating this story is - think of all the heartbreaking scammer stories you may have heard and replace the intentionally malicious entity on the other end with one of the most valuable companies in the world. It doesn't matter how many researchers work on alignment, safeguards, etc if companies have no financial incentive to prioritize anything other than engagement. 

[How to stop feeling lost in ~~tech~~life: The wafflehouse method](https://www.yacinemahdid.com/p/how-to-stop-feeling-lost-in-tech)
Most of the people that read these (my friends) aren't tech people, but this is such a thorough guide for how to actually incorporate "invert the problem" that I think it warrants a read by everyone. Perhaps not everyone will approach this using a DAG - but this ability to have end goals in mind, then break down the journey into steps and substeps, until you have immediate short-term priorities, is one of the most valuable things I've learned over the course of my life. Whether it's for fitness, software engineering, or research - this is one of the main challenges of any aspect of the human experience and this article provides a detailed and funny guide to walk you through it. 

[Widaplik, Polypills, and the Messy Business of Medical Progress](https://gregorykatz.substack.com/p/widaplik-polypills-and-the-messy)

Really interesting discussion about the FDA and the ways that we actually accomplish medical progress. I was chatting with a friend in residency recently and brought up some paper I was reading, only to end up discussing their frustration with the differences between clinical and academic medicine. This effect is amplified when we consider intersectional research (like medicine + ML), in which researchers build models and are aiming to improve metrics like AUC. The meaningful implications are often not present (yet) and require far more refinement and effort than these scientists like to admit. 

The challenging environment of the FDA right now is also not one that gets enough coverage. Since this article was published, Dr. Vinay Prasad has returned to his post (after being ousted by Laura Loomer/Rick Santorum), but is still terrifying just how heavily this administration emphasizes loyalty and ideological purity. Despite his ~~occasional~~relatively frequent disagrements with the medical establishment, and his tendency to be an asshole occasionally, I feel obligated to defend him as he was booted for such an idiotic reason. This is also not an easy position to have, and it's good to be reminded of just how complex (and high-stakes) these decisions can be.  